# 75. What is Atomicity?

In MongoDB, atomicity refers to the property that ensures a write operation (insert, update, or delete) on a single document is treated as an indivisible unit. This means either all the changes within the operation are applied successfully, or none of them are. This guarantees data consistency within a document and prevents partially updated documents.

- **Single Document:** Atomicity applies at the level of a single document. Even if an operation modifies multiple fields within the same document, it's treated as a whole.
- **All or Nothing:** Either all the changes included in the write operation are successfully written to the database, or none of them are. This ensures data integrity and prevents inconsistencies.
- **Concurrency Control:** MongoDB implements mechanisms to handle concurrent write operations from multiple clients or processes. These mechanisms ensure that only one operation modifies a document at a time, preserving atomicity.

**Benefits of Atomicity:**

- **Data Consistency:** Guarantees that a document is always in a consistent state, avoiding partially updated data due to interrupted operations.
- **Predictable Behavior:** Enables developers to write code with the assurance that their write operations will either succeed entirely or fail completely.
- **Simplified Error Handling:** Makes error handling for write operations more straightforward as you only need to consider success or failure of the entire operation.

```javascript
// Imagine an update operation attempting to increment a field "quantity" by 5 and set another field "status" to "in stock":
db.products.updateOne({ _id: "product1" }, { $inc: { quantity: 5 }, $set: { status: "in stock" } });

// Due to atomicity, either both the increment and the status update are applied successfully, or neither of them are.
// This ensures data consistency and prevents a scenario where the quantity might be incremented but the status remains "out of stock".
```

## MongoDB docs and other useful links

- [Atomicity and Transactions](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/write-operations-atomicity/)

_View [slides](../slides.pdf) 56._
