# 76. Importing Data

The `mongoimport` tool is a command-line utility used to import data from various file formats into a MongoDB database. It's a versatile tool for populating your collections with data from external sources, allowing you to efficiently set up your database or migrate data from other systems.

**Key Features of mongoimport:**

- **Supported File Formats:** It can import data from JSON, CSV (comma-separated values), and TSV (tab-separated values) files.
- **Database and Collection Targeting:** You can specify the target database and collection where you want to import the data.
- **Header Handling (CSV/TSV):** For CSV and TSV files, you can indicate whether the first line represents field names using the `--headerline` option.
- **Data Type Conversion:** `mongoimport` attempts to automatically convert values from the import file to appropriate BSON (Binary JSON) data types used by MongoDB.
- **Error Handling:** The tool provides basic error reporting during the import process, helping you identify any issues with your data file or import configuration.

```shell
mongoimport --uri <uri> --db <database> --collection <collection> --file <file_path>
```

- `<uri>`: The connection URI for your MongoDB server.
- `<database>`: The target database name.
- `<collection>`: The target collection name.
- `<file_path>`: The path to your import file (JSON, CSV, or TSV).
- `[options]`: Optional flags for configuration (e.g., `--headerline` for CSV/TSV).

## MongoDB docs and other useful links

- [mongoimport](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/database-tools/mongoimport/)
- [JSON to MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/compatibility/json-to-mongodb)
